promotion.md, before:

# Const promotion

Note that promotion happens on the MIR, not on surface-level syntax.  This is
relevant when discussing e.g. handling of panics caused by overflowing
arithmetic.

## Rules

### 1. Panics

Promotion is not allowed to throw away side effects.  This includes
panicking.  Let us look at what happens when we promote `&(0_usize - 1)` in a
debug build: We have to avoid erroring at compile-time (because that would be
promotion breaking compilation), but we must be sure to error correctly at
run-time.  In the MIR, this looks roughly like

```
_tmp1 = CheckedSub (const 0usize) (const 1usize)
assert(!_tmp1.1) -> [success: bb2; unwind: ..]

bb2:
_tmp2 = tmp1.0
_res = &_tmp2
```

Both `_tmp1` and `_tmp2` are promoted to statics.  `_tmp1` evaluates to `(~0,
true)`, so the assertion will always fail at run-time.  Computing `_tmp2` fails
with a panic, which is thrown away -- so we have no result.  In principle, we
could generate any code for this because we know the code is unreachable (the
assertion is going to fail).  Just to be safe, we generate a call to
`llvm.trap`.

As long as CTFE only panics when run-time code would also have panicked, this
works out correctly: The MIR already contains provisions for what to do on
panics (unwind edges etc.), so when CTFE panics we can generate code that
hard-codes a panic to happen at run-time.  In other words, *promotion relies on
CTFE correctly implementing both normal program behavior and panics*.  An
earlier version of miri used to panic on arithmetic overflow even in release
mode.  This breaks promotion, because now promoting code that would work (and
could not panic!) at run-time leads to a compile-time CTFE error.

### 2. Const safety

We have explained what happens when evaluating a promoted panics, but what about
other kinds of failure -- what about hitting an unsupported operation or
undefined behavior?  To make sure this does not happen, only const safe code
gets promoted. The exact details for `const safety` are discussed in
[here](const_safety.md).

An example of this would be `&(&1 as *const i32 as usize % 16 == 0)`. The actual
location is not known at compile-time, so we cannot promote this.  Generally, we
can guarantee const-safety by not promoting when an unsafe or unconst operation
is performed -- if our const safety checker is correct, that has to cover
everything, so the only possible remaining failure are panics.

However, things get more tricky when `const` and `const fn` are involved.

For `const`, based on the const safety check described [here](const_safety.md),
we can rely on there not being const-unsafe values in the `const`, so we should
be able to promote freely.  For example:

```rust
union Foo { x: &'static i32, y: usize }
const A: usize = unsafe { Foo { x: &1 }.y };
const B: usize = unsafe { Foo { x: &2 }.y };
let x: &bool = &(A < B);
```

Promoting `x` would lead to a compile failure because we cannot compare pointer
addresses.  However, we do not even get there -- computing `A` or `B` fails with
a const safety check error because these are values of type `usize` that contain
a `Scalar::Ptr`.

For `const fn`, however, there is no way to check anything in advance.  We can
either just not promote, or we can move responsibility to the `const fn` and
promote *if* all function arguments pass the const safety check.  So,
`foo(42usize)` would get promoted, but `foo(&1 as *const i32 as usize)` would
not.  When this call panics, compilation proceeds and we just hard-code a panic
to happen as well at run-time.  However, when const evaluation fails with
another error (unsupported operation or undefined behavior), we have no choice
but to abort compilation of a program that would have compiled fine if we would
not have decided to promote.  It is the responsibility of `foo` to not fail this
way when working with const-safe arguments.

### 3. Drop

TODO: Fill this with information.

### 4. Interior Mutability

TODO: Fill this with information.

## Open questions

* There is a fourth kind of CTFE failure -- and endless loop being detected.
  What do we do when that happens while evaluating a promoted?

Commit message:

explain problems around references in constants

promotion.md, after:

# Const promotion

Note that promotion happens on the MIR, not on surface-level syntax.  This is
relevant when discussing e.g. handling of panics caused by overflowing
arithmetic.

## Rules

### 1. Panics

Promotion is not allowed to throw away side effects.  This includes
panicking.  Let us look at what happens when we promote `&(0_usize - 1)` in a
debug build: We have to avoid erroring at compile-time (because that would be
promotion breaking compilation), but we must be sure to error correctly at
run-time.  In the MIR, this looks roughly like

```
_tmp1 = CheckedSub (const 0usize) (const 1usize)
assert(!_tmp1.1) -> [success: bb2; unwind: ..]

bb2:
_tmp2 = tmp1.0
_res = &_tmp2
```

Both `_tmp1` and `_tmp2` are promoted to statics.  `_tmp1` evaluates to `(~0,
true)`, so the assertion will always fail at run-time.  Computing `_tmp2` fails
with a panic, which is thrown away -- so we have no result.  In principle, we
could generate any code for this because we know the code is unreachable (the
assertion is going to fail).  Just to be safe, we generate a call to
`llvm.trap`.

As long as CTFE only panics when run-time code would also have panicked, this
works out correctly: The MIR already contains provisions for what to do on
panics (unwind edges etc.), so when CTFE panics we can generate code that
hard-codes a panic to happen at run-time.  In other words, *promotion relies on
CTFE correctly implementing both normal program behavior and panics*.  An
earlier version of miri used to panic on arithmetic overflow even in release
mode.  This breaks promotion, because now promoting code that would work (and
could not panic!) at run-time leads to a compile-time CTFE error.

### 2. Const safety

We have explained what happens when evaluating a promoted panics, but what about
other kinds of failure -- what about hitting an unsupported operation or
undefined behavior?  To make sure this does not happen, only const safe code
gets promoted. The exact details for `const safety` are discussed in
[here](const_safety.md).

An example of this would be `&(&1 as *const i32 as usize % 16 == 0)`. The actual
location is not known at compile-time, so we cannot promote this.  Generally, we
can guarantee const-safety by not promoting when an unsafe or unconst operation
is performed -- if our const safety checker is correct, that has to cover
everything, so the only possible remaining failure are panics.

However, things get more tricky when `const` and `const fn` are involved.

For `const`, based on the const safety check described [here](const_safety.md),
we can rely on there not being const-unsafe values in the `const`, so we should
be able to promote freely.  For example:

```rust
union Foo { x: &'static i32, y: usize }
const A: usize = unsafe { Foo { x: &1 }.y };
const B: usize = unsafe { Foo { x: &2 }.y };
let x: &bool = &(A < B);
```

Promoting `x` would lead to a compile failure because we cannot compare pointer
addresses.  However, we do not even get there -- computing `A` or `B` fails with
a const safety check error because these are values of type `usize` that contain
a `Scalar::Ptr`.

For `const fn`, however, there is no way to check anything in advance.  We can
either just not promote, or we can move responsibility to the `const fn` and
promote *if* all function arguments pass the const safety check.  So,
`foo(42usize)` would get promoted, but `foo(&1 as *const i32 as usize)` would
not.  When this call panics, compilation proceeds and we just hard-code a panic
to happen as well at run-time.  However, when const evaluation fails with
another error (unsupported operation or undefined behavior), we have no choice
but to abort compilation of a program that would have compiled fine if we would
not have decided to promote.  It is the responsibility of `foo` to not fail this
way when working with const-safe arguments.

### 3. Drop

TODO: Fill this with information.

### 4. Reference constraints

[Constant references](const_refs.md) impose some restrictions on the data they
point to; the same restrictions apply to promoteds.

## Open questions

* There is a fourth kind of CTFE failure -- and endless loop being detected.
  What do we do when that happens while evaluating a promoted?
